This
is an interview with Dr. R. D. Turk, retired
professor of veterinarian
parasitology.
Today's date is January 9th, 1980, and this is
Terry Anderson.
Right, okay.
This is an interview with Dr. R.D. Turk, retired
professor of veterinarian parasitology.
Today's date is January 9th, 1980, and this is
Terry Anderson. Dr. Turk, could you tell us about
your background, where and when you were born?
Well, I was born in a little town of Ice Grove,
Missouri. Population 1,000 on August 1, 1903. OK.
Can you tell us something about your parents? My
parents were Joseph H. and Laura B. Turton. My dad
ran a hardware store in Ice Grove. And my mother was
a housekeeper. I was number four in a family of six.
Two sisters and three brothers. What about your
father's education? He had a high school
education, but
was fairly well read. And in addition to being a
hardware dealer, He was also mayor several times
and president of the local school board.
My mother had two years of college in a
local college, which has long now been closed.
Was it a religious college? No.
What type of people were your parents? I don't
understand what you mean, what kind of people.
Well, could you characterize them for me? Well,
they were just good, hard-working people. My
mother was raised in Babbage, and when she married
my dad, she changed over to the Prevotarian place.
He was superintendent of the Prevotarian Sunday
School for umpteen years.
We all joined the Presbyterian Church at a
comparatively early age. Can you tell me about
your early life, your education? Well, since we
had six kids and ten cows, we had a place on the
outskirts of town about 15 acres. And the cows
helped us
eat. and clothes. Otherwise, I took money from the
hardware store.
I repeated the first grade of Astro Community
School due to illness. But then I skipped the fifth
grade.
So I graduated from Astro High School in the class
of 21, third from the bottom.
The third from the bottom was not due to my
lack of ability to learn, but rather to my
inability to stay out of mischief. It's rather
difficult to graduate top man in your class when
you've been expelled twice. Oh, really? What were
you expelled for? Well, first time for
inadvertently hitting a teacher in the head with
an eraser. I wasn't aiming at him. He had
temporarily left the room and I was getting even
with the big boy in the front row. And he returned
just in time to see the boy duck and catch the eraser
in his eye.
The second time, I and three other seniors decided
we would paint Astro HS on the schoolhouse roof
with the number 21.
Unfortunately, the principal came in and found
the ladder leading up to the attic. And as he
climbed up the steps, I stamped on his toes.
Enough said. Fortunately, my dad was president of
the school board. So I was returned to school under
the proviso that I make a public apology to all
concerned,
which, incidentally, was difficult to do.
Following high school, I worked a year in the local
post office with the magnificent title of
assistant postmaster and the
Yearly stipend of $300. 300? Yeah. What year was
that? 1922. 1922, 300, my goodness. $25 a month.
Can you tell me about the interest that you had in
high school?
Well, I really didn't have too many. Even that time
was had defective hearing, so I spent most of my
time reading
Law Comes to Houndo Valley or smoking six guns
rather than listening to the lectures.
But I was always interested in animals, partly due
to the 10 cows and partly due to being neighbor to a
veterinarian.
Since he was a relative newcomer, having arrived
there after World War I,
he would take me with him to locate the various
farms and incidentally to help where help was
needed.
I actually made more going with the veterinarian
than I did from my job as assistant Postmaster.
Why did you decide to go on to college? Well there's
a long story about that. We didn't have too much
money so I went to Kansas City, Missouri where I
took a job with American Radiator Company.
Radiator Company? American Radiator Company.
And
they offered me a job, $15 a week in the office,
or $35 a week in the foundry. So naturally, I took
the foundry job.
I'd saved up $1,500
to go to the bus queue, and the bank closed. I got 3%
back, which you don't have to be a mathematician to
realize that was $45. Was this in 1929 or 30? No,
that was 1923, 24. And the bank closed them. Yeah.
The president of the bank had been playing the
stock market. There was one, it was a... pretty
much a one-man bank. Actually, it was called the
Centropolis
Bank. I don't remember the other name,
but it was on East 70.
It was on East
64th Street.
American Radiator Company was at 200 East 15th
Street, so I banked there as a matter of
convenience.
Naturally, I decided to keep my money spent up
after that.
So with a new Ford car and lots of help,
I had no trouble.
In 1928, the American Radiator Company
closed down temporarily. And at that time, I was a
skilled iron moulder.
So I went to Chicago, where I had no trouble
containing a job with the
International Harvester Company
at 31st and Blue Island in Chicago.
After a year living in Chicago in a 40th boarding
house on South Houston Street, I decided in held it
a little bit more for me than
being a foundry worker. So I came back to Kansas
City in the spring of 1929.
Spent the remainder of the summer
driving an oil truck for the entire
oil company.
and enrolled at Kansas State, which at that time,
Kansas State Agriculture College, KSAC, in
Budner Medicine.
While in the foundry,
I also moonlighted somewhat
driving taxi cab a few months one winter when I was
laid off
and boxing at the Bell Telephone Company
Friday night smokers. Really?
I was a pretty good boxer at 127 pounds, but one
night I met a Mexican boy with six hands.
I didn't remember anything from Friday
afternoon, or Friday evening rather, till Monday
morning, so I decided that boxing was not for me.
The only nice thing was when I went to Kansas State I
didn't have to take physical education because
I'd been a professional athlete. Did you ever make
much money boxing? Oh, yes. $25 a night. Oh, is that
what it was? $25 a night? For three three-round
bouts. Three three-round? With three different
opponents? Well, no. One round went three
three-round bouts. Oh, I see. Oh, they had a whole
bunch of hungry kids. Get up there and flail around
and get your ass knocked over. Yeah,
all right. I had a little difficulty getting into
Kansas State for several reasons. First, I was
eight years older than the majority of my class
since I graduated from Ash Grove High School in
1921 and entered college in 1929.
Second, I'd had no physics, no chemistry, and only
three units of English.
However, I took a comprehensive examination
and past with satisfactory results due primarily
to my omnipotent reading. I was born slightly
deaf, or rather with impaired hearing.
So reading was really my pastime.
Much to my surprise,
I ended up my freshman year
with a straight A average with the exception
of military.
When they'd holler the command, I would usually
step behind because I couldn't hear very good.
I went back to the and
got accused for military, so one year in the ROTC as
a freshman is all the military record I had.
I graduated from Kansas State with the highest
grades in veterinary medicine
that had been turned in up to that time. I think it's
been surpassed since then. But anyway, with the
exception of military science,
the only other B grade I made was in poultry
husbandry. Due to the fact I used to return to
Kansas City on occasional weekends, and
sometimes would miss the train coming back, and
thus miss the 8 o'clock Monday morning session in
Poultry Husbandry.
Well, could you describe the curriculum at Kansas
State? Well, let me tell you first how I stayed in
there. Oh, fine. I got a job in the department of
pathology
and so I could work from seven to eight and from
after school till as long as was necessary.
I got 25 cents an hour my freshman year and then In my
sophomore year, I was zoomed up to 35 minutes an
hour, which,
with a little help from home, let me keep body and
soul together. The curriculum,
incidentally, the job
was mine after school hours I was there by myself
with the job of cleaning up glassware and the
microscopes and various other duties. So I spent
quite a bit of time studying on company time.
Nevertheless, it must have been difficult during
the Depression. It must have been difficult
during the Depression. It was. It was rather
difficult, but it had its advantages. Two
hamburgers were a nickel.
Mm-hmm. All soft drinks were a nickel. Pie was 10
cents a quarter. And it took a lot of ingenuity to
spend a dollar for one meal. Mm-hmm.
I joined Masonic Lodge in March of 1929. So I
joined the Acacia Fraternity in 1931 and was
president of the fraternity the year I graduated.
The curriculum was primarily basic. The freshman
year was anatomy, histology,
and
chemistry.
And I forget the other sophomore year, pathology,
more anatomy,
biological chemistry,
elementary course in physics,
and so forth.
Junior and senior years we got into clinics.
And really, I don't remember the names of the
specific courses, but we had non-infectious
diseases, infectious diseases, clinical
diagnosis, and
more pathology. Due to my job in the pathology
department, most of the pathology was just a
review.
And I graduated with honors.
Since the world was not meeting a path to my door in
1933,
I stayed on in the Department of Pathology
as an assistant until September 1 at the
magnificent salary of 75 cents an hour. I
then took a job with the University of Illinois at
$1,500
a year.
But
due to my defective hearing, I
had a little difficulty, and so I quit.
What were you teaching at the University of
Illinois? I wasn't teaching. I was clinical
assistant. I see.
And came back to Columbus, Kansas. and open to
practice.
That was a mistake.
By Christmas 1933, I, pardon me,
no, I netted $200 cash.
In May of 1934,
It stopped raining, and the grasshoppers moved
in.
And in August 1934, I netted $60.
Since
my fixed expenses were $5 a month for our office,
and $10 a week for board and room
with gasoline, $0.15 a gallon,
I wasn't breaking even.
About that time, the federal government
instituted what is known as the cattle reduction
program.
The idea was to,
rather than plow the little pigs under, or rather
plow the cotton under and
kill all the pigs, that they would test the cattle
and take out the diseased ones and leave the
healthy cattle there. So I went to Oklahoma.
Pardon me. So I went to Oklahoma working for USDA.
At the French's salary of $1,500 a year,
plus a nickel a mile on my car,
plus $5 a day, which included hotel board, hotel
room, and meals.
That must have been considered a very good job. It
was a good job. It was cash. But I am ashamed to admit
it, but I cheated sometimes on the meals. I'd jack
up the back wheel of the car and let it run while I was
eating dinner. Five cents a mile for seven miles
would give you 35 cents, which quite a feat. Then in
1935,
due to my academic background, they
decided to move me into Oklahoma City to take
charge of the Bang Disease Laboratory. The what
disease? B-A-N-G.
Possibly S. More commonly known as brucellosis,
which is an infectious abortion of cattle.
We prepared our own antigen and
tested all the samples brought in from other young
men who were also working for the Among
the employees was a young lady named June
Hardesty, H-A-R-D-E-S-Y,
who was a skilled laboratory technician.
She worked for me a year.
And I've been working for her ever since. To make a
long story short, in December of 1935, I
was told by the power to be that I was to be
transferred to Baltimore, Maryland
for the United States Department of Agriculture
to work in a laboratory there. I didn't like the
East. I'd been to Chicago. So
I was really lost what to do. I wanted to get
married, and I didn't want to go back where the snow
flies.
So out of the clear blue sky, I got a letter from Dr.
H. Smith. It was a Texas ag culture experiment
statement. asking me would I be interested in a job
at Texas A&M. He didn't say what the job consisted
of or what the salary paid or anything. How did he
even know of you? Had he met you before? He had
written around. Oh, he had written around. I
imagine. I never did find out. I never did find out.
And he just grinned and said, well, I just heard of
you. But anyway. I was offered a job at $2,400 a year
at Texas A&M. That's $200 on 12 months. And most of
the employees of the college proper, a lot of them
were getting $1,500 and $1,800 for nine months. In
fact, there were PhDs in chemistry and physics and
English and various liberal arts that were only
getting 15, 18, or $2,000 for nine months. So I
tickled the old man, I think, or rather the word
would be amused. I just wrote back, yes, when will I
report? And that tickled him, so he said February
1. That was all the correspondence we went through
for my job. But I wanted the laboratory because of
my hearing So June and I got married February 18th.
I spent a week at home visiting
and reported to Texas on February 1, 1936.
June wondered what kind of a town was College
Station. I said, I don't know. I have no idea. So we
came through Curtin, and I said, well, it's not
very big, is it? Then we saw another town that said
Bryan. I said, well, I think College of Dayton is
fairly close to Bryan. So we came into Bryan,
stayed at the old LaSalle Hotel.
I went out the next morning to report.
And much to my surprise, College of Dayton was just
a campus. All the profs lived on the campus and
everybody else over there. There were a few
colored people living outside and there were some
farms come up almost against it.
Dr. Smith said, well, I'm glad you're here. I said,
I'm glad I'm here also. So I wanted to be honest with
him and I told him, I said, I don't hear very well. He
said, well, that's all right. Don't worry about
that. I'll talk loud enough you can hear me.